Hell hath no fury like a wanderluster imprisoned by shelter-in-place orders for a year.
Once the COVID-19 vaccine is a-flowin’, and quarantine parole is granted, the wayfaringly souled will hardly be content to merely lowercase-“t” travel.
I mean over-the-top, not-even-playing travel. Drain-the-kid’s-college-fund travel. Not-even-gonna-Gram-it-cuz-haters-would-send-death-threats travel.
Can I get an Amen? Or, better yet, an Oman?
From the Caribbean to the Middle East, here are five outlandish, high-key and aspirational ways to right this year’s infinite wrongs.
Thrilla in the ‘guilla
The penthouse at the Four Seasons sleeps up to nine, so choose wisely among your new GoFundMe pals.Four Seasons Anguilla
Have 90 stacks burning a hole in your pocket? Good. Thatll land you a 30-day stay in a three-bedroom penthouse at the Four Seasons Resort and Residences in Anguilla, which just reopened last month.
But wait … about that sticker-shocking $90,000? For starters, you’ll have your own personal assistant, twice-a-week sessions with a private trainer, personalized culinary and wellness plans and IT help should blue screens of death beset you while “working” from “home” in this British Caribbean overseas territory. (Anguilla will be one of the first in the Caribbean to rollout the COVID vaccine in January, P.S.)
The nearly six-figure price tag also brings with it a private charter flight from San Juan with Tradewind. The roost you’ll rule over for a month designed by interior expert Kelly Wearstler sports a terrace, plunge pool and sleeps between six and nine. Definitely an opportunity to win friends and influence people. 
Living the hai life
The gates to Hotel the Mitsui Kyoto in Japan are 300 years old but the new hotel has a modern take on traditional design.The Luxury Collection
Safe to say you’re in the good part of town when right across the street there’s a 17th-century UNESCO World Heritage site. At Japan’s fresh, however awkwardly worded, Hotel the Mitsui Kyoto, a Luxury Collection Hotel &amp; Spa, that’s exactly what you’ll share a block with in the form of Noji Castle.
But Noji is yesterday’s news back on your side of the street, relish in the just-opened 161-room castle of sorts that’s none too shabby. Walk through its 300-year-old Kajiimiya Gate and find the former private residence of the all-powerful Mitsui family to be a $890 and up-per-night palace of tea rooms, priceless art, hot thermal springs and a spa menu with shiatsu massages; basically all forms of traditional Japanese excess.
Noji, schmoji!
Put some English on it
Get steeped in tradition and royalty at Coworth Park in tony Ascot, England.Coworth Park
Drop the remote and back away from your “The Crown” binge. Instead, vacation like a royal IRL at Coworth Park’s 1775-built Dower House in Berkshire, which bursts forth Anglo splendor like kingly entremets do blackbirds.
Recently restored by Fox Lindon Associates, the three-suite Georgian countryside cottage, glutted with sunlight and fresh air alike, is set off from the main house. It boasts white-washed walls, exposed beams, antique furnishings and overstuffed velvet sofas to accommodate its overstuffed guests (thanks a lot, personal chef).
The green space alone justifies the greenbacks you’ll be spending (rates start at $540 a night) think endless acres of gardens, babbling brooks, wildflower meadows and fields. Then think of taking it all in by horseback, gripping a polo mallet. Tallyho! 
Sneak a peak
Admire Omans mountains from an infinity pool at 6,500 feet, at Alila Jabal Akhdar.
Welcome to the mile-high city Middle East edition! Jabal Akhdar scrapes the sky some 6,500 feet above sea level in a governorate of northeastern Oman renowned for its majestic mountains.
Its Alila hotel is the perfect base camp to climb them and by “climb” we mean just ogle them from the propertys insane infinity pool. If you must be active, there are tons of said peaks and other eye candy in the gorges, fortresses and canyons that the hotel can arrange for you to explore.
Only downside, because of you know what: F&amp;B is room-service only and neither its spa nor gym are available. But with gorge gorges, who needs ’em (From $395 to $1,550)
Do the Bart, man
Make a splash with a Caribbean view over at Le Sereno, St. Barts.Le Sereno St. Barths
The other li’l luxe island that could, St. Barts, recently dropped its 2- to 3-day COVID test requirement for tourists. You still need the rapid test, but that means you wont even need to wait until summer to crash at the ritzy-even-for-it Le Sereno, where its tricked-out villas rest on a 600-foot stretch of sandy beach.
Those billionaire bungalows normally start at $5,400 a night but stay over Christmas or through New Year’s and those very same villas jump to a little under $18,000, philanthropically including a half-day 47-foot catamaran charter. Pricier still, they also require a 12-night minimum stay over “the festive period.”