The Academy Museum is now the proud owner of Florence Pughs iconic floral dress from Midsommar. The organization behind the Oscars was the highest bidder in an auction held by A24, with proceeds going to coronavirus relief efforts. The final bid went for $65,000, per A24s website, though the Academy Museum declined to confirm the price point.
The May Queen dress is one of several props, wardrobe items and set pieces that A24 has been auctioning off to raise money for the FDNY Foundation, a non-profit that supports New York City firefighters and their families who have been impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. So far, A24s auction has raised over $200,000 to benefit the hardest-hit communities in New York City.
The frock in particular, made of 10,000 silk flowers and worn by Pugh in the final scene of Ari Asters 2019 horror film, was such a hot item that it caught the eye of Ariana Grande, among others. Grande shared a screenshot on her Instagram story in April of conversations with Pugh, indicating she was eyeing the elaborate gown. im crying / also im bidding as soon as possible, she wrote at the time. Halsey also appeared to be vying for the dress, tweeting dont [sic] bid for the midsommar may queen outfit.
The Academy Museum has not determined how or when the dress might be displayed.
The May Queen dress isnt the only Midsommar prop that sold for a few grand. The matching flower crown went for $15,000. The bear headdress, worn in the movie by Jack Reynor, sold for $5,750 and the fishing mallet went for $10,000. In total, items from Midsommar alone raised about $100,000 dollars for the FDNY Foundation.
Recognizable items such as the burgundy jacket worn by Zendayas character in Euphoria ($8,000) and the skateboard from Jonah Hills directorial debut Mid90s ($7,500) were also sold.
Collectibles still up for grabs include a bejeweled Furby pendant and the Weeknds wig from Uncut Gems, as well as the mermaid carving and Wakes pipe from Robert Pattinsons The Lighthouse. The remaining prop auction ends on May 20.
The “Midsommar” dressA24